The ankle is the joint connecting the foot to the leg.
Many ligaments surround and stabilize this joint
by criss-crossing between the lower leg bones,
the tibia and fibula,
and the many bones of the foot,
most notable, the talus.
A sprained ankle usually occurs
from a rapid shifting movement,
or improper planting of your foot.
Although common, ankle sprains can be serious.
Do to the stretching and possible tearing of ligaments.
The most common type of ankle sprain
is due to inversion or
inward rolling of the foot.
When this type of ankle sprain occurs,
the outer ligaments are stretched too far
and often torn.
The anterior talofibular ligament
is often the most commonly involved ligament
in this type of sprain.
A less common type of ankle sprain
is called an eversion injury.
This is caused by an outward rolling of the foot,
and affects the medial side of the foot.
When this occurs, the medial, or deltoid ligament
is stretched to the point of injury.
A high ankle sprain is an injury to the
large ligaments above the ankle
that connect and stabilize the
two long bones of the lower leg,
the tibia and fibula.
High ankle sprains commonly occur
from a sudden and forceful
outward twisting of the foot.
This injury is often associated with
sports where contact and cutting is present.
Ankle sprain symptoms can range from mild to severe
depending on the extensive damage to the ligaments
and surrounding soft tissues.
Mild sprains may be swollen,
tender and stiff,
but the ankle is usually stable
and able to support weight with little pain.
More severe sprains include bruising,
increased tenderness and swelling.
The ankle is unsupported
do to ligament stretching
or tears and walking can be painful.
For severe sprains, you may consult your doctor.
Your doctor will diagnose the severity of your sprain
and might order x-rays in order to rule out a fracture.
Complete tears of a ligament often heal naturally
and surgery is rarely required with ankle sprains.
Treatment of ankle sprains varies
according to the severity of the sprain
and aim to either reduce pain and swelling,
or stabilize the ankle.
Common treatment for a sprained ankle may include:
Icing the affected areas to reduce pain and swelling;
resting your ankle and using crutches;
anti-inflammatory pain killers such as
Ibuprofen, asprin or naproxen;
Immobilization of the ankle;
via walking boots or compression bandages;
Stretching and strengthening exercises.
Complete tears of a ligament often heal naturally
and surgery is rarely required with ankle sprains.